---
layout: post
title: "On Systems Thinking"
---

[//]: # (Introduction)

The concept of systems thinking has always been fascinating to me. While growing up, I started noticing how rigid every
system appeared to be – it seemed like every system (e.g. school, politics) didn’t have enough flexibility to really 
make a difference. There is a proverb that has always stuck with me: “If you give a man a fish, he eats for a day. 
If you teach a man to fish, he eats for a lifetime”.

I think this little proverb encapsulates really well the essence of systems thinking. After all, what is systems 
thinking? Donella Meadows is my favorite author from the field and this post will be **very much inspired by her 
posthumous book (2008) entitled “Thinking in Systems: A Primer”**. On that book, she wrote the following:

> A system is a set of things (…) interconnected in such a way that they produce their own pattern or behavior over time.

This simple definition sets the tone for this article. If the generated pattern is not sustainable over time, the 
system is flawed by nature. Therefore, for a system thinker, it is crucial to think about **long-term consequences** 
that come up as a result of the relationship between the systems’ elements. Moreover, a well-designed system should 
have internal mechanisms to deal with external (and *internal*) forces.

Currently, our society is made up of systems embedded into other systems embedded into other systems and so on, 
**making the overall system extremely rigid**. 
This is one of the main problems in the field - and in society itself - and one of the reasons why cryptoeconomics 
is so important to change this paradigm.

At its essence, any system is made up of three things: its **elements**, the **interconnections** between them and 
a **purpose** (or *function*). Let’s take a closer look at how systems really work:



[//]: # (Part 1 - Elements, interconnections and purpose)

<subtitle>Elements, interconnections and purpose</subtitle>

The **elements of a system** are the easiest part to notice. They are usually tangible things, clearly identifiable by an 
external entity. If you consider, for example, a football team, the elements of that team are the players, the coach, 
medical staff, the president, etc. Usually, **changing an element won’t cause profound impacts on a system** – unless 
that element is *too* important in such a way that it changes the purpose of the entire system, or it changes the 
interconnections between other elements in a meaningful way.

While the elements of a system are usually easy to see, the **interconnections between them might be subtler**. 
Following the same analogy, it is not easy to understand all relationships between all the players and the coach and other
staff members. It's quite complex actually - **that's why we call them complex systems**! Even more importantly, it’s 
harder to tell **how much impact does a certain relationship might have** for the general well-being of the system. 
We live in a [nonlinear world](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonlinear_system), which makes 
**[interconnections hard to understand](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/8141138-without-friction-a-simple-linear-equation-expresses-the-amount-of)**. 
Only through **[experimentation](https://journals.iupui.edu/index.php/advancesinsocialwork/article/view/137/138)** we can see what works and what does not work.
A change in the interconnections (e.g. a bad relationship between two elements becomes good) may provoke a change in 
the overall system behavior.

The **purpose of the system** is the goal that it aims to achieve. The best way to understand the system’s purpose is 
to watch for a while to see how the system behaves. More important than the actions themselves, is the intentions behind them. 
Let’s go back to the football team – let’s imagine it lost the last 20 games. Can we accurately say that the purpose 
of our team was to lose? Not really – we would have to take into consideration the team’s behavior during those 20 games. 
Did they run in every game? Were they improving? Were they just bad players (elements) who gave everything but still 
managed to get bad results? The key takeaway is this – <ins>purposes are inferred from behavior, not from stated goals</ins>. 
**The behavior of a system is its performance over time** (i.e. its growth, stagnation, decline, randomness or 
evolution – basically, its *patterns*). System behavior reveals itself as a series of events that happen over a certain period of time.

Here’s two great quotes from Meadows regarding the system’s purpose and behavior dichotomy:

> If a government proclaims its interest in protecting the environment but allocates little money or effort toward 
that goal, environmental protection is not, in fact, the government’s purpose.

> Systems thinking goes back and forth constantly between structure (diagrams of stocks, flows, and feedback) 
and behavior (time graphs).

A **holistic approach to systems**, considering its structure and patterns over time, is the best way to design, 
model and simulate a sustainable system.



[//]: # (Part 2 - Well-designed systems)

<subtitle>Well-designed systems</subtitle>

When systems work well, there is a harmony in each sub-section of the system. It’s beautiful to see – structure 
and behavior are perfectly aligned. The systems’ elements and their interconnections serve the system’s initial purpose. 
For a system to work well, these four characteristics must be, somehow, present: **resilience, self-organization, 
hierarchy and security**. Let’s break them down step-by-step:

- **Resilience** is the system’s ability to persist in a mutable environment. A resilient system is a flexible system, 
able to adapt to different scenarios and to recover from interferences to its regular behavior.

- **Self-organization** is the ability of a system to make its own structure more complex. For a quick analogy with 
the blockchain world, quantum computers are eventually coming and can be potentially harmful to cryptocurrencies. 
However, a self-organized system would be able to come up with solutions 
(e.g. [zk-STARKs](https://medium.com/coinmonks/zk-starks-create-verifiable-trust-even-against-quantum-computers-dd9c6a2bb13d)) 
against this sort of threats.

- **Hierarchy** is best defined in the dictionary: “a system in which people or things are arranged according to their 
importance”. This might be a tricky one. A good hierarchical system is designed in such a way that makes the system 
more modular. Just like in software engineering, modularity can be highly beneficial and increase specialization. 
However, **hierarchies are prone to suffer from abuse of power from the higher layers**, which may compromise the whole 
integrity of the system. This is why [decentralized governance](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/09/26/limits.html) 
is so important – to **reduce the problems and inefficiencies caused by malfunctioning hierarchies**.

- Regarding **security**, good mechanism design requires building systems that resist collusion [even by the 
elements running their own system](https://twitter.com/SarahJamieLewis/status/1424768978849714177).

Moreover, an important function common to almost every system is to ensure that **the system itself is sustainable 
and preserves over time**.

If the behavior of a system is consistent in the long-term, it’s probably because that system has a mechanism creating 
that persistent behavior. In these cases, we can say that the mechanism operates through a feedback loop. When that 
behavior is considered to be positive, stable and aligns with the system’s purpose, we call it a **balancing feedback 
loop** – if a system gets to this point – without compromising on resilience, self-organization, hierarchy and 
security – I would consider it to be a well-designed sustainable system.


[//]: # (Part 3 - Mechanism design and visual modeling)

<subtitle>Mechanism design and visual modeling</subtitle>

**Mechanism design** is a fascinating field because you start with a pre-defined goal (e.g. protect the Ethereum ecosystem 
against malicious actors), and then you create the incentives and penalties (e.g. **PoS**) to make sure that your goal 
is achieved. The main difficulty with mechanism design is creating the conditions that incentivize the system’s elements 
to behave in a certain way – we can see this, for example, in the difficulty of creating incentives to build public 
goods and increase the work in R&D.

Studies of complex systems are designed to explore what would happen in that system if a number of driving factors 
unfold in certain ways – therefore, it is encouraged for all system/mechanism designers to [start their work with a 
spreadsheet](https://twitter.com/_Dave__White_/status/1410737164590059522) in order to explore possible alternatives,
and ask “what-if” questions (while **iterating** over time). Asking the right questions is critical to predict the model’s behavior.

Systems thinkers use **graphs of system behavior** to understand trends over time, rather than focusing attention on 
individual events. Moreover, they use behavior-over-time graphs to learn whether the system is approaching a goal 
or a limit, and if so, how quickly. The <ins>pattern of the graph is important, and so are the inflexion points</ins>. 
This is why tools like [cadCAD](https://cadcad.org/) fit in so well with mechanism design and should be more and more used 
when designing new mechanisms for the web3.


[//]: # (Conclusion) 

<subtitle>Conclusion</subtitle>

As we’ve seen throughout the article, every system thinker or mechanism designer should be concerned in building 
sustainable and defensive systems that can prosper in the longer-term and that can cope well with outside 
forces (e.g. collusion) – we live in the real world, a place where agents can cooperate, take unpredictable behaviors 
and, therefore, **good system design requires contemplating all sorts of possibilities**.

I believe systems thinking will be an increasingly important field throughout the next decade. With web3 and the 
metaverse emerging, this is the perfect time to experiment and build new systems. Every mechanism designer should take 
into consideration the fundamental characteristics that make up a good, sustainable system. 

The new paradigm of web3 is developing itself at a fast speed and innovation doesn't slow down in the crypto 
area – decentralized finance (DeFi) already has many useful protocols and banks are becoming increasingly obsolete; 
NFTs are here to stay and to empower artists and creative people; crypto **play-to-earn games** are becoming increasingly 
[more important](https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/387206) (e.g. Dark Forest was [one of the most funded projects in the Gitcoin 
GR11](https://twitter.com/darkforest_eth/status/1441782606543011842) and the amount of web3 games being developed right 
now is… insane).

The only thing missing in the puzzle is decentralized governance, which requires [moving beyond coin voting](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/08/16/voting3.html) - coin
voting is not credible-neutral. Currently, there are [some limitations](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/09/26/limits.html), 
but luckily we have **<ins>two very important tools that can (and will) be extremely important in the development of 
new solutions and mechanisms</ins>**:

- **Cryptography (especially zero-knowledge proofs)**: Cryptography will play a massive role in upcoming DeGov solutions.
I believe that ZKPs are an extremely powerful technology, and they are as big as blockchains. I also believe ZKPs are very
underrated at the moment and [zk-technology will be essential for mechanism designers](https://twitter.com/_miguelemos/status/1442092164390002692).
ZKPs combine the benefits of privacy within a system, while making sure that people follow the rules of that same system
(e.g. [MACI](https://appliedzkp.github.io/maci/), CLR.fund, anti-spam solutions (!), voting systems with [Aragon](https://aragon.org/vocdoni), etc); 


- **cadCAD**: [cadCAD](https://cadcad.org/) is an open-source Python library that assists in the process of designing, testing and validating
<ins>complex systems</ins> through modeling and simulation. There are many interesting use cases already happening, 
including this [open-source Ethereum economic model simulator](https://www.ethmodel.io/) (more detailed explanation 
[here](https://twitter.com/CADLabs_org/status/1415986905485910023)). In my opinion, it is an amazing tool that really 
fits in with the whole “systems thinking” approach mentioned throughout this post. In this new context, with 
blockchain technology, which is so multidisciplinary and has so many new variables, I believe tools like this will be extremely
valuable.   


A combination of the right tools with the right incentives (and coordination mechanisms) will allow us to overcome 
our current limitations in cryptoeconomics regarding decentralized governance and move towards a self-sustainable 
system that will empower all of us. Mechanisms like [RPGF](https://medium.com/ethereum-optimism/retroactive-public-goods-funding-33c9b7d00f0c) 
are a great starting point, but I’m confident we will be able to come up with more and more ideas to fund public goods 
and other types of important assets.

Cryptocurrency is all about experimentation, and we have the right tools to design, build, iterate, validate and expand 
on possible solutions – which may very well be hybrid solutions combining both financial and non-financial elements. 
It’s the [decade for mechanism design](https://twitter.com/VitalikButerin/status/1251934446632173572), and with the 
development of zk-technology - combined with the help of cadCAD - I am **very confident in the mechanisms that we are 
going to be able to come up with** towards DeGov! It’s all about incentives, security and coordination.

More than ever, being multidisciplinary is extremely important. In the first place, knowing how to code should be 
mandatory in all schools – it is as important as reading or writing. Secondly, the best DeGov solutions will probably 
combine elements of finance and non-finance – therefore, a good understanding of finance and DeFi protocols is also relevant. 
Game Theory is another field critical to understand (and create) strategies and incentives. Additionally, a good 
understanding of zk-technology (especially non-interactive ZKPs) will also enter the equation. At last, if you 
learn cadCAD, you will be able to design, validate, optimize and understand new protocols and mechanisms. Knowing 
the basics of each area is a great starting point for having the full vision of where we currently stand and where we 
can go from here. 

**The intersection points of multiple fields are the points that will make a difference and allow us to go beyond coin voting governance 
in a sustainable way**. Once we find these points, we will be taking important steps towards creating a decentralized 
credible-neutral governance system. The future is bright, and I expect to see - in the next decade - a new 
system that will, eventually, replace our current form of governance and <ins>reinvent capitalism and democracy</ins> – **all of 
this will happen while having fun in the process, as we like to do in the Ethereum *ecosystem***.
